---
layout: post
url: https://ankit1khare.github.io/journeywithcs/MS-in-CS-in-US-part-1/
shortnode: Master's degree in computer science in USA, how does it feel and what can it bring?
title: Ms in CS in US Part 1
---

Spending 2 years and 6 months in Texas, USA has been exciting. One comes across this kind of statement and makes sense out of it in their own way, which might be something that the writer or the speaker didn’t even mean. My focus here while writing this post is to be more concrete and least presumptuous. Also, I would try to write less of inferences and more of experiences which I've undergone because there’s a beauty to not inferring and letting the reader decide for themselves.

First things first, as far as I know, a lot of people come to the USA for master's seeking better job opportunities. I'm being very general but the post is targeted mainly for ones who are not sure what they exactly want from their education in the USA or for those who are unhappy from their current situation and want to pursue something better but don’t know what it is. Personally, I was satisfied with my job and knew very well, it was one of the best I could ever get in India. After-all, I was working with a company that gives more than 80% appraisal to newbies who perform well, have caring HR, great perks and amazing projects. Mine was related to finance and energy management utilizing latest software technologies of that time: MVC 5 with C#, Knockout JS, Entity framework, WCF and more. My personality prompted me to eventually crave more and transition towards something less abstract (in terms of the technical development I was doing). So, after evaluating myself enough when I got totally convinced that I'm willing to take my next big step, I left for a new adventure.

Again, generalizing a lot but people while pursuing master's mainly focus on getting A's and then start applying to jobs to have more flexibility in getting something they might like. To achieve this, they either target easy A classes and spend a major portion of the latter half of the master's on LinkedIn and interview preps. Is there anything wrong with it? No!!! not at all. Then why am I pointing it out as if it was a big mistake. Reason is simple, spending a huge chunk of your life seeking something better and pursuing an end goal rather than focusing on the present itself is not going to lead to a bright future. But it will definitely lead to a tendency to seek and worry all the time remaining in the possibilities for future. If you can't enjoy your present, then please learn to do it. Why would you dare to get crushed in your homeland and then later invest a lot in your education to get crushed further, to come here and take the beatings of getting A's, new surroundings, job search, H1B filing, green card, citizenship, and leaving behind your family and friends in your home country. At least back in your town you would be crushed relatively mildly. So please take this seriously and think about it once in your leisure time, What do you exactly want? if it is money, then the USA does offer $$ but with the repercussions of all those stresses I mentioned. Moreover, there is a lot of expenditure and cost of living here. A salary of 15 lakhs in India is almost equivalent to 80K here. But after spending 2-3 years for education and incurring huge debt as well as white hair you get 15 lakhs equivalent which you might have achieved by slowly and gradually progressing in IT companies within India if you work diligently. If you were digilent you would have grown in India too. Otherwise your chances of impressing employers here to file H1B for you are already less.

Now, does it mean, No to the USA!!!!!!! Of course not. But, is it a yes to the USA!!!! of course not either. The USA is the land of opportunities for those who are passionate and willing to take risks. RISKS, what am I saying? Here, the risks I’m talking about are, not worrying about H1B and getting a job but to make sure what you are most passionate about and what you are learning at the moment. Come to the states because it has quality education, amazing professors, a lot of support services, great infrastructure, higher quality of living and more research opportunities. Although, remain aware about the risks and accept that the worst case would be to return back due to lack of jobs and then having to work again for years to first repay your debt. My purpose is not to discourage you but I am willing to show you the worst case scenario in advance since I’m a programmer after all.

For the ones who are already aware about what they are passionate about, they would either find it in their home country or abroad. They would do their best and would highly likely get it. I'm in no way targeting them here in this post. My specific focus is on those who don't know what to expect, who don't know their passion(s) yet and who are confused about their skills.

My suggestion is to clear yourself first and see what might interest you because you won’t have a lot of time to spare for exploration during your masters (if you are super rich then you might lol). If nothing interests you particularly, then pick the one which looks most promising. Evaluate your goals and desires and then research accordingly which country, which university, which professor and bla bla.

It's not just about interest it's also about endurance and perseverance. If you have the will to endure and tenacity to proceed unflinchingly towards your decisions then go ahead with them even if you are currently weak in computer science or math or whatsoever.

I mentioned a very important word earlier, RISK. Coming back to it again, you need to really understand the risk of “seeking” something all the time. Otherwise it's all in vain. Pursuit of Happiness is not just a movie but a fact. Who knows whether you would be able to find that happiness in your future. Many people can't even enjoy vast amounts of luxuries they have and they themselves don’t know why. So, don't seek something which hinders you from living in the present and missing out on what you have in the moment. Even competing with someone who is far from your skill level due to different background or personality or both, would lead to seeking, anxiety and a lot of worries.

Since I’m suggesting you all do this and that, does it mean I myself do it. The interesting answer to this is, yes. I try, I fail, I succeed, I learn and keep growing. Not competing, not worrying and not seeking things are one of the most necessary skills that I have seen people not being able to acquire. Obviously, I am not a buddha and I'm still progressing but I'm happy that I'm doing what I can. I also wish that you start thinking about these things soon.

Let me make things more concrete using my own adventures in the USA. I came here with least excitement since I already knew I'd come here when I was very young, maybe 12. How? dang it, should I really answer that. It's because, the background where I come from, people believed a lot on astrology and palmistry. A lot of people conditioned my mind saying most of my life will be spent in the USA. Hence I had this belief somewhere in my mind way back before I actually came in 2016. I spent a lot of time talking to a lot of people involved in a variety of activities, be it piano, singing, Hyper-tricking, skateboarding, computer games, philosophy, artificial intelligence, bodybuilding and many more. It gives a lot of perspective if you talk to learned people who know their thing. I also talked to a lot of professors here, since I found them pretty open to sharing knowledge. Next, I tried many labs here. I just visited and saw what might excite me. The problem was, everything seemed exciting so I got confused. But then computer vision caught my attention. Professor Kamangar in my university didn't even have a lab but still I was keen to study computer vision from him and online courses on the same were enough for me to decide that I'd like it, at least more than other areas like HCI, cloud and compilers. From there I got my track and did some exciting projects. Sounds fun, right? Nooooooooo, it was not. I had a hard time initially picking up the class content since my background was not at par with PhD students in my class. Professor used to teach at a level where I felt assignments were like projects. And don't even ask about the project. I might call it a full fledged research paper.

After taking help from friends, consulting the professor, and working hard for a few months I started getting my metacognitive skills right and I made a good project that eventually inspired many people to start learning computer vision. From there, I decided to stretch further and take a thesis track. I chose a professor who has a track record of not graduating people on time and in most of the cases, students didn't even graduate. They left their thesis and pursued non-thesis coursework again to graduate. Did I take him out of sheer pleasure of taking the challenge of getting supervised by him? nope. I requested him to supervise him because I loved the approach he took to check if I should be taken or not. He just wanted to make sure I am interested and if I've minimal background I'd need to do something further.

Gosh, I didn't even realize how much I've typed, I think I'll split this into parts and cover my journey in parts. Stay tuned for my next update.

Enjoyyyyyyy!!!
