---
layout: post
url: https://ankit1khare.github.io/journeywithcs/why-I-picked-cs/
shortnode: Even with a diverse range of interests CS is still I would chose anytime as my career path
title: Why I picked Computer Science?
---

In the middle school I first saw how a computer looks like. My excitement was skyrocketing when I saw this device capable of doing so much. You can play games, watch movies, make presentations, write books, create tables, download encyclopaedia and get the answer of almost anything. I never hesitated to explore my Pentium 4 no matter how many times I corrupted the operating system and got a nice beating from my parents. After 4th time they restrained me from even touching the computer. I don’t know how it happened. Everytime, there was a different reason. Once it was a silly batman game. I couldn’t even run the game. THe moment the game would finish loading, the computer would restart. WHen my father called the vendor he said he can’t do anything but reinstall the whole operating system. We had a fashion designing institute, and all the computers had a lot of software programs related to the courses offered there. THat’s it used to take long for the vendor to reinstall everything. Second time, they said it was some dll file which is necessary for the working of OS. THe IT professional just went outside to chew tobacco and when he came in, he saw one of those files to be corrupt. I really didn’t do anything purposefully, I just tried opening my game and I think when the game didn’t open I deleted the folder and something else got deleted as well. Third time, I was trying to network the two computers and by mistake I configured a lot of device drivers incorrectly which led to OS corruption somehow. And the last time I was playing with RAM chip and I didn’t press it hard enough in the slot thinking it might break. THe moment I turned the PC on, there was a tiny spark and I knew the chip was long gone. 

My fascination with computer was huge for me to decide that I would take computer science as my career path. When I decided to prepare for the toughest engineering exam IIT-JEE, my parents did something intense. They deprived me of my best pleasure. They locked the computer. Even when I had learnt programming in C language at the age of 12 and won HTML inter-school competition at the age of 13 my parents thought I would keep experimenting with computer and not focus my preparation. I regretted my decision for taking that exam. For 4 years I had no access to the computer. First board exam and then engineering exam preparation. After 4 years when I got the chance I just did one thing, sitting in front of my computer and playing games and surfing internet. For the first time, I had high speed internet. I had to make full use of it. Finally in college I picked up C++ quickly and learnt Java, C#, Autocad, SQL and data structures and algorithms. In my job, I performed well and then getting fascinated by the power of machine learning I flew to USA for masters. Here, I let my long ____ desire to manifest. I finished my courses fast and picked up pace to develop image caption architec




