---
layout: post
url: https://ankit1khare.github.io/journeywithcs/MS-in-CS-in-US-part1/
shortnode: Master's degree in computer science in USA, how does it feel and what can it bring?
title: Ms in US in CS Part1
---

Spending 2 years and 6 months in Texas, USA has been quite exciting. Normally, one comes across this kind of statement and makes sense out of it in his/her own way, which is something the writer or the speaker might not even mean. My focus here while writing this post is to be concrete and specific. So I would try to write less of inferences and more of experiences which I've underwent. 

First things first, as far as I know a lot of people come to USA for master's seeking better job opportunities. I'm being very general but the post is targeted mainly for ones who are not sure what they exactly want from their education in USA or for those who are unhappy from their current jobs and want to pursue something better but don’t know what it is. Personally, I was unsatisfied with my job even when I knew it was one of the best I could ever get in India. After-all, I was working with a company that gives more than 80% appraisal to newbies who do great, has caring HR, great perks and amazing projects. Mine was related to finance and energy management utilizing latest software technologies of that time: MVC 5 with C#, Knockout JS, Entity framework, WCF and more. My personality prompted me to work on something less abstract. So, after trying hard to gather interest when I was totally convinced that I'm meant for something else I left for a new adventure.

Again, generalizing a lot but people while pursuing master's in USA mainly focus on getting A's and then start applying to jobs to have more flexibility in getting something they might like. To achieve this, they either target easy A classes and spend a major portion of their latter half of the master's on LinkedIn and interview preps. Is there anything wrong with it. No!!! not at all. Then why am I pointing it out as if I was a big mistake. Reason is simple, Master's in USA is all about enjoyment. If you can't enjoy it then better don't come. Why would you dare to get crushed in your homeland and then later invest a lot in your education to get crushed further, to come here and take the beatings of  to getting A's, new surroundings, job search, H1B filing, green card, citizenship, and leaving behind your family and friends in your home country. At least back in your town you would be crushed relatively mildly. So please take this seriously and think about it once in your leisure time, What do you exactly want? if it is money, then USA does offer $$ but with the repercussions of all those stresses I mentioned. Moreover, there is a lot of expenditure and cost of living here. So a 15 lakhs in India is almost equivalent to 80K here. But after spending 2-3 years for education and incurring huge debt as well as white hair you get 15 lakhs equivalent which you might have achieved by slowly and gradually progressing in IT companies within India if you work diligently. Because if you are digilent you will grow there in India too otherwise your chance of impressing employers here to file H1B for you would be very less. 

Now, does it mean, No to USA!!!!!!! Of course not. But, is it a yes to USA!!!! of course not because USA is the land of opportunities for those who are passionate and willing to take risks. RISKS, what am I saying? Here, the risks I’m talking about are of not worrying about H1B and jobs but to make sure whether what you are most passionate about and what you are learning at the moment. Come to USA because it has quality education, amazing professors, a lot of support services, great infrastructure, higher quality of living and more opportunities. Although, remain aware about the risks and accept that the worst case would be to return back due to lack of job and then having to work again for years to first repay your debt. Plus, there might not be many jobs in advanced technologies like machine learning and AI in general. My purpose is not to discourage you but I am willing to show you the worst case scenario being a programmer. 

For the ones who are already aware about what they are passionate about, they would either find it in their home country or they would leave to some other, chasing what they want. They would do their best and would highly likely get it. I'm in no way targeting them here in this post. 
My specific focus on those who don't know what to expect, who don't know their passions and who are confused about their abilities in CS. 

My suggestion is to clear yourself first and see what might interest you. If nothing interests you particularly then pick the one which does the most. Evaluate your goals and desires and then research accordingly which country, which university, which professor and bla bla. 

It's not just about interest it's also about endurance and perseverance. If you have the will to endure and tenacity to proceed unflinchingly towards your decisions then go ahead with them even if you are currently weak in cs or have no mathematics background or whatsoever. 

I mentioned a very important word earlier, ENJOYMENT. Coming back to it again, you NEED TO ENJOY. Otherwise it's all in vain. Pursuit of Happiness is not just a movie but a fact. Who knows whether you would be able to enjoy in future. Many people can't even enjoy vast amounts of luxuries they have and they themselves don’t know why. So, don't seek something which hinders you from living in present and missing out of what you have in the moment. Even competing with someone who is far from your skill level due to different background or personality or both might lead to seeking, anxiety and worry. 

Since I’m suggesting you all to do this and that, does it mean I myself do it. The interesting answer to this is, yes. I try, I fail, I succeed, I learn and keep growing. Not competing, not worrying and not seeking things that create anxiety are one of the most necessary skills that I people would have a hard time acquiring. Obviously, I am not a buddha and I'm still progressing but I'm happy that I'm doing what I can. I also wish you start start thinking about these things sooner or even later. 

Let me make things concrete using my own adventures in USA. I came here with least excitement since I already knew I'd come here when I was very young, may be 12. How? dang it, should I really answer that. It's because, the background where I come from, people believed a lot on astrology and palmistry. A lot of people filled me up saying most of my life will be spent in USA. Hence I was very conditioned way back before I actually came in 2016. Initially, it was hard getting along with people and surroundings since I'm introverted and eccentric. Can't elaborate here what kind of introvert and eccentric since it will be very long, so you are free to understand these terms as you please. 
I spent a lot of time overcoming my awkwardness and talking to a wide range of people involved in a variety of activities, be it piano, singing, Hyper-tricking, skateboarding, computer games, philosophy, artificial intelligence, bodybuilding and many more.
It gives a lot of perspective if you talk to learned people who know their thing. I also talked to a lot of professors here, since I found them pretty open to share and knowledgeable to consult with. Next, I tried many labs here. I just visited and saw what might excite me. The problem was, everything seemed exciting so I got confused. But then computer vision caught my attention. Professor Kamangar in my university didn't even have a lab but still I was keen to study computer vision from him and online courses on the same were enough for me to decide that I'd like it, at least more than other areas like HCI, cloud and compilers. From there I got my track and did some exciting projects. Sounds fun, right? Nooooooooo, it was not. I had a hard time picking up the class content since my mathematical aptitude was not par with PhD students in my class. Professor used to teach at a level where I felt assignments were like projects. And don't even ask about project. I might call it a research paper. Above all that, I was never a hard working guy back in India. Here also, it took some time for me to realize why I don't work hard and how to work smart keeping in mind my study stamina. 

Somehow after taking help from friends and working hard for few months I got a B in computer vision class. Still I was happy because I knew I learnt a lot and I could make a good project. Moreover, I kind of knew what would I be doing next, which was the best thing. From there, I decided to stretch further and take thesis track. I chose a professor who has a track record of not graduating people on time and in most of the case students didn't even graduate. They left their thesis and pursued the coursework again to graduate. Did I take him out of sheer pleasure of taking the challenge of getting supervised by him? nope. I requested him to supervise him because I loved the approach he took to check if I should be taken or not. He just wanted to make sure I am interested and if I've minimal background I'd need to do something further. 

Gosh, I didn't even realize how much I've typed, I think I'll split this into parts and cover my journey stepwise. Stay tuned for the next update.

Enjoyyyyyyy!!!
