---
layout: post
url: https://ankit1khare.github.io/journeywithcs/Ms-in-CS-in-US-part-2/
shortnode: What to expect when you have research in mind
title: Ms in CS in US part 2
---

Let's pick up from computer vision class. For those who somehow stumbled over this post first, I'd recommend going through the first one for more context but I am not gonna mind even if you continue with this one. 

Although computer vision class was an exasperating experience, it was a fulfilling one too. In India, I used to prepare for clearing exams, be it school, engineering exam or college. The preparations were concerned with developing problem solving skills but still lacked application to real world problems. I could see a definitive difference in my existing approach and the method people apply here in courses. Professor went through a lot of practical applications of theoretical concepts in real-world products. Moreover, he gave directions on how to read more on one of those topics in case someone feels interested. Moreover, the exams and assignments were also very practical and research-oriented. 

As I mentioned earlier, one of the reasons why I was so glad that I took computer vision course and followed my interest and gut feeling is that I was clear on what would be my next step. Talking about it further, I would start with the day I came across image captioning while checking cse231n course from stanford.

This was the first time, unfortunately though, where I got exposed to the power of neural networks. It immediately captured my attention and I knew I have something to do with this technology or approach or algorithm or whatever it is. I asked the teaching assistant, a researcher under my professor and the professor himself about why is there tremendous hype about Deep learning and Neural Networks. Interestingly, their answers had a certain diversity. TA said if I acquire decent expertise in neural networks I would get a very good job in silicon valley. Professor wanted to make me aware that it won't be easy to go about taking neural networks as my research topic without even knowing what they are. While the researcher under the same professor assured me that neural network is fairly simple and the underlying principles are really easy to understand. 

Now, how would one make his/her mind after listening to such a diverse set of advices? Well, it is not so difficult if you wanna make it easy. For me, I saw the man lecturing at stanford at the speed of a japanese bullet train. Generally I'd increase the speed of videos but here I had to do the opposite. Any guesses, whom I'm talking about? Deep learning folks would know for sure. ANDREW KARPATHY, stanford graduate, now working for Tesla's autopilot conception system directly reporting to Elon Musk, quickly became my inspiration. It took me seconds to imagine myself building an image captioning architecture beating the existing state of the art. Like him, I wanted to make some novel contributions to this research lying at the intersection of computer vision and natural language processing. 

Daydreaming is a good habit. Getting inspired is also a very nice thing. However, not realizing, the amount of work and the amount of time with respect one's own skill level and learning ability that the desire would take, can lead to a problematic situation. After taking computer vision class it was painfully clear to me that things might look easy from outside but diving in and checking them out is a different game. So I wanted to make sure whether I would be able to finish my research in the coming 10 months. You might have heard, people overestimate what can be done in 1 day and underestimate what can be accomplished in a year. I felt the same. In my attempt to cleverly verify the feasibility of my research topic using my understanding of my own capabilities and other people's experiences with the same research topic, I wasted a lot of time and overanalyzed things. I kept talking to different people and looking at neural network videos from outside the shell without diving in into the real math and implementation. 

Let me be frank. Well, I am always frank. These things look quite fascinating from outside and their applications look cool but when it comes to building such architectures, the real challenge arises. Now, how one takes this challenge is what determines whether he/she should go further with it. There are nuances associated to them especially if you wanna research and develop something novel. I had no prior knowledge of machine learning and the kind of applied mathematical approach it requires was something entirely new to me. I had only one reason to do it, I always assumed that research is very cool and it is a class apart. These researchers are in the league of their own and if I can be like them I’d look cool. Moreover, I wanted to do something consistently for a longer period of time and gain disciple through it. 

Professor Huber is known as the AI guy of the university. He is a standard in autonomous robotic systems here. People say his master’s students are more than other professor’s PhD candidates. I went directly to him to show my enthusiasm and out of my own surprise as well as other students in his lab, He took me without hesitation. As mentioned earlier, his idea of accepting students under his supervision is very unique. I also realized that whenever he talked, about 80% goes above my head. At the time, I kept wondering if it was his oceanic knowledge or my puddle sized apprehension that I couldn’t catch up much. But anyways, being a brave or foolish person (you can decide what you’d call it) I impressed him enough by giving him an enthusiastic yet focused problem statement for my thesis.  

From here the road was pretty smooth. He left me free, not keeping track at all. And I kept swaying like a free bird. I finished a lot of series on netflix, binge watched the entire 8 seasons of vampire diaries for my utmost contentment. I learnt piano from a friend and went to gymnastic gym with another to learn Hyper-tricking and martial arts. I also realized how much I enjoyed youtubing and soon saw myself as a youtuber, investing a lot of time in learning to edit videos and ranking them high in search. 

Finally when I came to realization that my purpose of taking thesis for becoming disciplined is being defeated and I have only 4 months left, I felt like an endangered tiger. From there, I pushed myself hard and in next 5 months I ended up submitting a paper in best conference of my area. Seems like magic, right? This time there’s no pun intended. I really accomplished this seemingly impossible task. But I got all the right resources at the right time and above all, my intelligent intellect supported me lol. 

What am I trying to tell you here? What is the end goal? Nothing really. No kidding here. Why should there be a moral of the story always. Every instance of this experience is worth it and has a lot of insight. One can see how things happen in the life of a computer science graduate on a thesis track who started from nowhere and finally ended up being somewhere. 

I credit my success in my research topic to my fearlessness, lack of worry, quality of identifying whom to take advice from and whom not to, and the ability to adapt to a new environment. 

By environment, I meant the new ways of studying, the approach to learn something and the feeling of remaining uncomfortable facing something new and challenging. Again, a lot of data in this post. In the next one, I’ll conclude with technically how I approached my research and in my flying time as a free bird what I learnt about US culture. 

Stay tuned folks!
