---
layout: post
url: https://ankit1khare.github.io/journeywithcs/why-I-picked-cs/
shortnode: Even with a diverse range of interests CS is still I would chose anytime as my career path
title: Why I picked Computer Science?
---

In the middle school I first saw how a computer looks like. My excitement was skyrocketing when I saw this device capable of doing so much. I’m wording it exactly as I used to think about it in my mind (not out loud lol). Thanks to my clear and detailed memory (not bragging here, it only works outside of academics), I can still word it precisely even after so many years. I thought one can play games, watch movies, make presentations, write books, create tables, download encyclopaedia and get the answer of almost anything. The possibilities I saw were numerous. I never hesitated to explore "my Pentium 4" no matter how many times I corrupted the operating system and got a nice beating from my parents. After 4<sup>th</sup> time they restrained me from even touching the computer. I don’t know how it used to happen. Everytime, the cause was  different. Once it was a silly batman game whose loading bar never reached the end but it made my OS reach its end. We had a fashion designing institute, and all the computers had a lot of software programs related to the courses offered there. That’s why it used to take long for the vendor to reinstall everything. Second time, they said it was some dll file which was necessary for the working of the OS. The IT professional just went outside to chew tobacco and when he came in, he saw one of those files to be corrupt. I really didn’t do anything purposefully, I just tried opening my game and I think when the game didn’t open I deleted the folder and something else got deleted as well. Third time, I was trying to network the two computers and by mistake I configured a lot of device drivers incorrectly which led to OS corruption somehow. And the last time I took the RAM chip out and while pushing it back in, I didn’t press it hard enough in the slot thinking it might break. The moment I turned the PC on, there was a tiny spark and I knew the chip was long gone. 

My fascination with computer was huge for me to decide that I would take computer science as my career path. When I decided to prepare for the toughest engineering exam IIT-JEE, my parents did something intense. They deprived me of my best pleasure. They locked the computer. Even when I had learnt programming in C language at the age of 12 and won HTML inter-school competition at the age of 13, my parents thought I would keep experimenting with computer and won’t focus enough on my preparation. I regretted my decision for deciding to take that engineering exam. For 4 years I had no access to the computer. After 4 years when I got the chance I just did one thing all day all night, sitting in front of my computer playing games and surfing internet. For the first time, I had high speed internet. I had to savor every moment of it. Then came the prestigious college time. My hopes of having a lot of fun in college came true.  I made some really cool friends, kept hanging out with them, ate all the delicious food I could get my hold onto, in the state famous for its richness in foods and a lot more. In terms of studying computer science, I picked  up C++ quickly from classes and learnt Java as well as C# on my own. Autocad, SQL, data structures and algorithms were the best labs ever, although I didn’t like the lectures that much. Frankly, I spent a lot of time in college with my friends and I’d say those are the lifelong buddies I made there for which I’ll always be glad. I was involved in three organizations and served the community for more than 700 hours in those four years. Besides, I tried my hand in singing, bodybuilding and metaphysics. I joined singing club and impressed my instructor as well as other buddies there with my glamorous choice of songs lol. In gym, my instructor used to push me hard with new exercise regimes every week. He really taught me a lot about nutrition and exercise. I remember going back and reading further about supplementation, nutrition and exercises as if I would wanna become a fitness trainer in the long run. The college time came to an end real soon. No, literally, surprisingly I was the last person to show up in almost every class but first person to get a job and leave the campus for an On-Job training. 

 In my job, I went in with high motivation and full confidence that web development is easy pesy. But soon I realized that professionally the way it is done is intense. The technology changes like everyday and you are required to perform well  within a strict time frame. You won’t get extra time to learn the new technologies but still you would be expected to apply them efficiently for solving the business logic. I completed my training fast in just 4 months and took the remaining two months to work with a team full of coding stars. They were the elites in the company. If you take average of the team’s yearly increment, it would be around 65%. The problem was, the more I worked the more I’d get. I faster I finished a task the harder the level of the next task would become. I used to work 12 hours a days in order to cope up with learning the new technologies part and catching up on the domain side as well. After finishing this project, the next one was relatively easy at first. But later, the manager assigned me to two projects at once out of which one was on production so there was zero scope for errors. Although I liked the challenging environment in my company I heard about machine learning and instantaneously got fascinated. While working for the company it was impossible for me to acquire knowledge on something so new and math oriented. I saw online MOOCs and made up my mind to go back to classroom. I flew to USA for masters and if you wanna know about what happened in USA, you can read the other three posts (MS in US ones). Obviously flying to USA was not that easy, there are a lot of formalities. I had to give GRE, TOEFL and then a VISA interview. I just gave myself 24 days to rigorously prepare for GRE and TOEFL. Most of my time was spent in trying to figure out what exactly I wanted to learn within machine learning and which university fits the best. Besides, I had a great time in my home eating all the great home-made food after a long time and working out in the gym. Moreover, being fond of driving I used to take my mother’s car here and there, just for fun. I also made a lot of friends online on language exchange platforms. Talking to them for hours had changed my accent and my old friends wouldn’t even recognize me if I used english on phone. 

Finally, my visa came and I came to The University of Texas at Arlington. Professor Manfred Huber was my first choice since he had a reputation of expecting novel research contributions no matter if you are a master’s student or PhD. I think you guys know by now that I’m not just about computer science. I have a variety of passions and interests. My advice, again free advice, to all of you is to try a lot of stuff and get to know what you like. You never know what you might have a taste for. Trying a lot of different things has a remarkable effect on personality and thinking. It gives a new insight on how to approach towards learning new things and that approach is very different for everyone. So keep your mind open and dive in.

Peace!!!



