---
layout: post
url: https://ankit1khare.github.io/journeywithcs/MS-in-CS-in-US-part-3/
shortnode: There's a lot to do here as a free bird
title: Ms in CS in US part 3
---

During procrastination there’s a fear, restlessness, some kind of worry, a sense of wrongdoing persists at some corner of your consciousness. A lot of time you get reminded of the fact that you are not doing what you are supposed to do at the moment. This thought eats up a lot of pleasure from the moment and even leaves a sort of sorrow. But still, people keep pushing themselves into the dark by not listening to this thought. One of the core reasons for this is that they don’t want to face the uncomfort that comes with the right thing they are supposed to do. They fear the feeling of not being able to do something or not being good at something. 

To all the reckless master procrastinators out there, this is my message to you. It’s really not that hard. Just go out and make yourself very uncomfortable for few days. You will see how you would start getting involved and how the activity would start becoming easy. Only the initial phase of fe days or may be a month is hard. And that phase too is not as hard as it seems. Note that if in case this hard period keeps feeling hard for months and months, then know that the activity is not meant for you. 

Why did I keep this procrastination experience of mine here? Simply because I’ve noticed students under thesis program suffering from prolonged procrastination due to a combination is mainly four major reasons, first is they are entering some new sub-domain of computer science and they know they know only a little and a lot of catching up is required, second is they know that they have plenty of time and there’s no immediate deadline, thirdly they have more passion for relaxation and chilling rather than computer science stuff, and finally they have a personality where they have less or may be no fear of what might happen if they fail in their graduate program, they are simply reckless. The fourth factor is a bit scarce and I’ve seen it in only few people. THe first three are mainly observed. When you take thesis and you have zero research experience and especially if you are just starting with a new field like AI and still want to delve deeper into a specific topic and produce a novel idea, my free advice is to keep this procrastination phenomenon in mind and prepare yourself to work hard even if you think you are smart. The more you lose time the harder you’d regret later. If while you procrastinate, try and do something which you at least regret less. It may be acquiring a new hobby or may be doing something like watching an anime if it gives you a lot of pleasure where you don’t regret that much the reminisce of that time even if you had more important things.  

Wandering across the campus, challenging myself to do things which I would feel awkward or frightened to do, and participating in campus activities were enough for me to make my life exciting besides sitting alone at my room and watching tons of movies and series which has always been my first preference (until it gets really boring). But there are people who need a bright city with bright nightlife and more lively day life. You certainly won’t find that in Arlington. So, if you that kind of person, target some other universities located in some lively city of california or new york. I don’t have much idea about other states but in Texas people are welcoming and friendly. Some of them are friendly because they want to convey the message of Jesus to you but mostly I found people to be warm. In the beginning I was even surprised seeing people smiling while crossing me at the street whenever there was an eye contact. It was unusual for me since I never experience it in India. 

I don’t really know if it was luck or something else, but when I landed here, a guy came to pick me up at the airport for free. He was from a non-profit organization of the university. He even helped me shop at walmart. It was so frustrating to choose from the items available there since every brand is new and you don’t have an idea which one to pick. My american friends who were local to the city used to give me free rides to grocery shop. 

At the time when I was challenging myself just for the fun of being uncomfortable and facing my fears, I actually made a lot of friends. Let me give you an example of how I used to do things which I’d never usually do. One day a girl was sitting in Nederman Hall (a place full of students hanging out, studying together or waiting for their class to begin) and she was surrounded by many people from all the directions. I saw a guy saying something to her and going out of the nearby door. I guessed he must be her boyfriend or at least a good friend. People were looking at the girl as she was sitting at the center and another reason was her beauty. I made my move. I went to her, said, “hey, I have a couple of questions for you, if you are not doing anything you might be find them interesting to answer?”. She was kind of schoked and she replied that she’s fine answering them. There I got my chance to do something even more unusual. I dropped my laptop on the table in front of her and even my cell phone saying, “I’ll back from the washroom and then ask those questions”. She said okay. After coming back in 2 minutes, I asked her how she felt when I trusted her with those expensive items. She said she was surprised and felt I shouldn’t have done that. I could see that she would not have done what I did if she was in my place. This showed her personality traits. Moreover, she uncomfortable voice and body language made it obvious that she can’t talk to people easily, she is introvert. To make her comfortable I told her that my intentions are nothing but to know her and see myself while knowing her to myself better through doing something which I’ve never done and i.e., to talk to a stranger without knowing what to say in the middle of a lot of people who are actually staring hard. I said, “these days I have made a lot of friends and I’ve learnt that it’s very essential to ensure that when you are hanging out with someone their time with is fun and if possible informative. Life is short, stresses are more, and competition is real high. That’s why I’d not want you to be uncomfortable”. She replied, “I was uncomfortable because I’m introvert and I’ve never talked to someone like this but now I’m feeling fine”. Soon her acclaimed boyfriend comes back. I felt happy that he came back. Any ideas why? 


Because I already saw him leaving and I could guess who he might be. I would be a decent challenge to approach a girl surrounded by many people who are looking at her and that too, a beautiful one. Over and above that, if her boyfriend is near it becomes even more fun. Remember people, my idea of doing this was to put myself in a drastically unusual situation where I would never want to be. This doesn’t means that I should drive on sidewalks and put myself in jail. When you do something challenging which brings your weakness on the surface new experiences arise and new results are achieved. By talking to random strangers I got to meet some really good people. Few of them turned out to be really good friends who helped me proofread my thesis, took me to grocery shopping, gave me singing lessons and taught me right pronunciations of a lot of words I’ve been pronouncing wrong since a while.     

The diversity I got here, I’m pretty sure I would not get it if I remained in my own country. So, it is one of the many advantages of coming to study in another country. Coming back to CS, as far as research is concerned it is a unique experience. Unique is terms of the feeling of doing something which is novel and which feel like an achievement. But the process of research is unique too. Shifting my mind to topic and remaining engrossed in it came after a little while. IN the beginning it was hard because I had a lot of catching up to do but I knew once this hard time gets over it will be fun. So I made sure that in this hard time I do my best since it will be easy to do my best in the easy one ahead and it won’t be as big of an accomplishment if I couldn’t do my best in worst. Excitement and nervousness/fear are same feelings. You might find illustrations of it in psychology. Similarly, I would say uncomfort is a stage of either depression/bliss. You are come out fighting you will experience bliss otherwise if you keep losing you would experience frustration.  By fighting I don’t mean to say pushing yourself to the limit and then turning nauseous and vomiting. I’ve pushed myself extremely hard in gym and and during preparation of GRE (for which I gave myself only 20 days). And I vomited in both cases. Believe me, I results were not good. Being uncomfortable is good, but there’s a way to do it and there’s a limit to it. If would come to you if you remain observant, vigilant and open. 

I used to write all my doubts on a piece of paper and I made it a habit to ask my professor no matter how stupid those questions might sound. I knew I like discussing with my professor so I made my weak points a fun activity by first trying those mathematical topics myself and then later cutting myself off and keeping it in the queue to be discussed with professor. A lot of negativity would arise when I couldn’t understand a lot of things. But I dealt with it by classifying what I could learn and what I wouldn't and then thinking how would I go about dealing with ones i couldn’t. I didn’t refrain from taking help. A lot of time escapism would come. Something inside of me would tell me that it is not my cup of tea. My intellect would deceive me in procrastination by saying let’s just talk to someone to identify if this is my cup of tea. Since it is his cup of tea he might be able to tell if it is mine or at least give some useful advice. It is good to discuss such things but you are more than capable of knowing when it becomes a way of procrastinating and wasting time. I made myself clear on one thing, NO MATTER WHAT I WOULD DO IT. NO MATTER WHAT I HAVE TO HAVE TO RESEARCH AND FIND A NOVEL SOLUTION TO MY TOPIC. NO MATTER HOW MUCH TIME IT TAKES AND EVEN IF I RUN OUT OF MONEY I WOULD NOT LEAVE IT AND KEEP TRYING.  Until I made myself clear on this, I always had a dilemma whether I would be able to do it or not. If I should do something else, if that topic is a good fit, bla bla. All unnecessary things. But once I had conviction, all self doubt and all self-deceiving tendencies started leaving. Now, my paper is in the best conference in computer vision and the result is about to come in 9 days. Moreover, today I got Research Assistantship (GRA) under my professor. He has so much faith in me that he believes I’d definitely come up with some novel heuristics that would optimize drone’s path planning. I’m going to try CNN, RL and other learning based approaches to simplify the grid maps to be evaluated by RRT. The challenge is to complete this research in 3 months and to get a desired job in my field before graduation (which is in coming may). Besides I’ve to write my thesis for previous research and keep up with my singing lessons. 

Hope you gained something from my experiences. I’d love to hear about yours. Feel free to send me an email. Enjoy!

Peace out!!!

   
